lightsout
=========

Switch HPC cluster nodes on and off as needed

By Ansgar Esztermann <aeszter@mpibpc.mpg.de>

1. Goal
When an HPC cluster is faced with a widely varying number of jobs, the energy
consumed by idle nodes may be more of a concern than the additional
stress imposed by shutting down and restarting the nodes. Ideally,
nodes should be switched on and off by the batch system: the scheduler
is the only instance that really can tell which nodes are needed
according to the current job load.
However, our version of Grid Engine does not provide this possibility,
so we have rolled our own.

2. Design
There is one basic assumption: there will never be any job that uses
the complete cluster (or if there is, an admin will be at hand to
switch on all nodes. Once this is established, one can choose three
numbers of idle nodes: minimum, optimum, and maximum. Whenever the
number of idle nodes falls below the minimum, additional nodes are
brought online until the optimum number is reached. Conversely, if
there are more free nodes than the configred maximum, nodes are shut
down to reach the optimum.
This buffer of idle nodes is then used by the scheduler to start
additional jobs (if any).
For heterogeneous clusters, these values can be set per partition
(i.e. a group of nodes with the same hardware characteristics). 
Partitions are not detected, but configured by the site admin (see
sample config file).

In order to make the program more robust, lightsout does not work as a
daemon. Instead, it is intended to be run from cron once or twice per
hour. It does not save any state across runs, so things like idle time
are not taken into account.

Lightsout will enable and disable nodes as necessary, so admins can no
longer reliably disable nodes for maintenance. Instead, nodes needing 
maintenance may be marked in the config file. This is also read and
displayed by qview.

3. Requirements
Lightsout needs the following libraries:
 * Florist (POSIX API)
 * XmlAda
 * AWS (Ada Web Server)
 * Xmlrpc-Ada 

Moreover, working installations of Grid Engine and Bright
Clustermanager are needed.

4. Invocation
The following commandline options are available:
Options may be given in full or with a single hyphen and the first
letter only
--debug gives debugging output
--verbose states which nodes are switched on/off
--no-action only goes through the motions without actually calling
   qmod or cmsh;  implies --verbose
--check-config only checks the config file, then terminates the program
--statistics shows a summary of what has been done
--help shows this message, then terminates

